4. A managed care company was found liable for denying valid claims for health
insurance coverage. The company was ordered to pay compensatory damages to
a group of plaintiffs. To ?make an example? of the insurer, the court also
ordered the insurer to pay an additional $10 million to deter other insurers from
engaging in the same wrongful acts. The $10 million award is an example of:
A. Punitive damages
B. Economic damages
C. Non-economic damages
D. Collateral source payments


5. Bruce was involved in an accident in a state that uses a pure comparative
negligence rule. Bruce was found to be 75 percent responsible for the accident.
His actual damages were $20,000. How much will Bruce be able to recover from
defendant?
A. $5000
B. $0
C. $15,000
D. $20,000

6. A state statute requires machinery in industrial plants to include automatic shutoff switches accessible to each employee working on the machine. Provinzano
Piping?s equipment does not have these switches. Jason, a Provinzano employee,
suffers an injury that an accessible shut-off switch would have prevented.
Jason?s best theory for recovery against Provinzano is:
A. Assumption of risk
B. Negligence per se
C. Res ipsa loquitur
D. Battery

7. Karen slips and falls in WallMart and is injured. Karen files a suit against
WallMart for $500,000. Under a ?pure? comparative negligence rule, Karen
could recover damages from WallMart:
A. Only if both parties were equally at fault
B. Only if Karen was less at fault than WallMart
C. Only if Karen was more at fault than WallMart
D. Only if Karen was less than 100% at fault 
7
8. Frank slips and falls in WallMart and is injured. Frank files a suit against
WallMart for $50,000. If Frank is 20 percent at fault and WallMart is 80 percent
at fault, under the ?50 percent rule? ?not-greater-than? comparative negligence
principle, Frank would recover:
A. $0
B. $25,000
C. $40,000
D. $50,000
9. Leo slips and falls in WallMart and is injured. Leo files a suit against WallMart
for $50,000. If Leo is 20 percent at fault and WallMart is 80 percent, under a
contributory negligence doctrine, Leo would recover:
A. $0
 B. $25,000
C. $40,000
D. $50,000
10. Diana is a passenger in a car driven by Henri Paul, whose negligence causes an
accident, injuring himself. Diana, uninjured and for no particular reason,
accompanies Henri to the hospital in a fast ambulance. The ambulance is hit by a
car driven by Dodi, injuring Diana. Diana files a suit against Henri, whose best
defense is:
A. Assumption of risk
B. Contributory negligence
C. Negligence per se
D. Superseding cause
11. Linda, a driver for Swift Transportation, causes a five-car accident on an
interstate highway. Linda and Swift are liable to:
A. All those who are injured.
B. Only those whose injuries could reasonably have been foreseen.
C. Only those whose cars were immediately ahead and behind Linda?s vehicle.
D. Only those who do not have insurance. 
8
12. In Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad Co., foreseeability was an issue. The question
addressed by the court was:
A. Was it foreseeable to the plaintiff (Ms. Palsgraf) that the scales would fall?
B. Was it foreseeable to the plaintiff (Ms. Palsgraf) that someone in the train
station would be carrying explosive fireworks?
C. Was it foreseeable to the passenger carrying the fireworks that they might
explode and injure someone?
D. Was it foreseeable to the railroad employee helping the passenger onto the
train that doing so might lead to injury to Ms. Palsgraf or another bystander?
E. Was it foreseeable to Ms. Palsgraf that her injury would have been caused by
an explosion?
13. The proximate cause requirement for a negligence tort is most likely NOT met
where:
A. A customer becomes ill from food that is carelessly packed at a processing
plant.
B. A patient becomes sick from a doctor carelessly prescribing the wrong
medicine.
C. A customer in a building supply store carelessly drops a small can of paint that
breaks open and is ignited from a spark caused when the metal can hits the
concrete floor.
D. A driver injures a pedestrian when rounding a curve at twice the legal speed
limit.
E. The victim of an accident was aware, prior to the actual accident, that the
accident was likely to occur.
14. Driving his sport utility vehicle negligently, Winnie crashes into a streetlight.
The streetlight falls, smashing through the roof of a house, killing Piglet instantly.
But for Winnie?s negligence, Piglet would not have died. Regarding the death,
the crash is the:
A. Cause in fact
B. Intervening cause
C. Proximate cause
D. Superseding cause 
9
15. In Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad Co., the court decided that the railroad?s
conduct was not wrong in relation to Palsgraf but did NOT decide whether the
conduct was negligent toward the man with the package (that led to Palsgraf's
injury). If the court HAD determined that the railroad employee was negligent
with regard to the man with the package, would the railroad have been liable for
the injury to Palsgraf?
A. Yes, because negligence to one party creates negligence to all other parties
injured as a result.
B. No, because Palsgraf's injury was still not foreseeable.
C. Yes, because of the doctrine of assumption of risk.
D. No, because Palsgraf was also negligent.
16. Milo invites Morton into her apartment. Morton commits trespass to land if he:
A. Enters the apartment with fraudulent intent.
B. Harms the apartment in any way.
C. Makes disparaging remarks about Milo to others.
D. Refuses to leave when Milo asks him to go.
17. Christy, a nurse, hires Adam, an accountant, to handle her accounts. Dissatisfied
with Adam's work, Christy sues him, alleging negligence. Adam may successfully
defend against the suit by proving that he:
A. Did not injure Christy in any way.
B. Does not know every principle of accounting.
C. Performed as well as an ordinary person could have.
D. Performed as well as Christy could have.
18. Calista was injured when she drove her car through a stop sign and was struck
by Harrison?s car. Harrison saw Calista and could have stopped. However, he
failed to do so since he had the right-of-way. Calista can recover damages from
Harrison under which of the following legal doctrines?
A. Vicarious liability
B. Last clear chance rule
C. Contributory negligence
D. Assumption of risk doctrine 
10
19. Paula locks Tony in a ground floor room. Tony sues Paula for false
imprisonment. Which of the following is true?
A. Paula would escape liability if she let Tony out of the room after one hour.
B. According to some courts, Paula would escape liability if Tony slept through
the entire period that the door was locked and thus was unaware that he was
being detained.
C. Even if Tony could easily have escaped through an open window, Paula still is
liable.
D. Paula would not be liable if Tony could have escaped by traveling two miles
through a narrow, filthy, rat- infested sewer line that periodically floods with
water.
20. Smitha goes diving during her Carnival Cruise. Carnival has Smitha sign a
waiver form indicating that, if she is injured by a shark, she cannot sue Carnival.
Smitha was bitten by a shark during her dive. Smitha sues Carnival. Carnival?s
best defense is
A. Comparative negligence
B. Contributory negligence
C. Implied assumption of risk
D. Express assumption of risk
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
** Questions 21-40 are worth three points each = 60 points (60 minutes) **
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
21. A physician performed scheduled surgery on her patient?s right ear for a
condition caused by prolonged and repeated infections in that ear. During the
surgery, the physician determined that her patient had been particularly
susceptible to this condition due to a previously unsuspected anatomical
abnormality. The physician reasonably believed that this same abnormality was
likely to exist in the patient?s left ear. Though the patient had not had many
infections in the left ear, if a similar course of recurring infections were to
transpire involving that ear, it would probably develop the same condition as the
right and require surgery. The physician therefore decided to perform surgery
on her patient?s left ear, although she had received his consent only to operate on
the right ear. The surgery was performed with due care and was successful.
In an action by the patient against the physician:
A. Patient will not recover because the extension of the operation was successful.
B. Patient will not recover because the extension of the operation was carried out
with due care.
C. Patient will recover at least nominal damages on a negligence theory.
D. Patient will recover at least nominal damages on a battery theory. 
11
22. Harry knew that the brakes on his car were in poor shape. They had been
squeaking for months and over the past few weeks, it had become harder and
harder to stop the car. Nevertheless, Harry continued driving. One day, as he
was driving with proper attention and within the speed limit down Pennsylvania
Avenue, a 6-year old named Truman suddenly jumped out from behind a parked
car right in front of Harry?s car. Harry jammed on his brakes but was unable to
stop in time. As a consequence, Harry ended up running into (and over)
Truman, causing him personal injuries. It will be stipulated at trial that Truman
jumped out from behind the parked car so suddenly and so close to Harry?s car
that he would have suffered the same injuries even had Harry?s brakes been
properly adjusted.
If Harry is sued in negligence for Truman?s injuries, can Truman establish a
prima facie case?
A. Yes, because Harry?s breach of duty in not keeping his brakes properly
serviced was the proximate cause of Truman?s injuries.
B. Yes, because Harry should reasonably have foreseen that he might cause an
accident by not being able to stop in time.
C. No, because Harry?s breach of duty in not keeping his brakes properly serviced
was not the cause-in-fact of Truman?s injuries.
D. No, because Harry?s breach of duty in not keeping his brakes properly serviced
was not the proximate cause of Truman?s injuries.
23. Plaintiff, a jockey, was seriously injured in a race when another jockey, Laffit,
cut too sharply in front of her without adequate clearance. The two horses
collided, causing Plaintiff to fall to the ground, sustaining injury. The State
Racetrack Commission ruled that, by cutting in too sharply, Laffit committed a
foul in violation of racetrack rules requiring adequate clearance for crossing
lanes. Plaintiff has brought an action against Laffit for damages in which one
count is based on battery.
Will Plaintiff prevail on the battery claim?
A. Yes, if Laffit was reckless in cutting across in front of Plaintiff?s horse.
B. Yes, because the State Racetrack Commission determined that Laffit
committed a foul in violation of rules applicable to racing.
C. No, unless Laffit intended to cause impermissible contact between the two
horses or apprehension of such contact by Plaintiff.
D. No, because Plaintiff assumed the risk of accidental injury inherent in riding as
a jockey in a horse race. 
12
24. Stu got into his car, released the brake, and prior to starting the engine, left it on
a slight incline in order to pick up a broken bottle lying in the path of the car.
The car started to roll in Stu?s direction. Tom, a nearby bystander, noticing that
Stu was oblivious to his peril, pushed him out of the path of the approaching car.
Tom was then struck by the car and was seriously injured. Stu lost his balance
from being pushed by Tom, struck his head on the curbstone, and was injured.
In the action by Tom against Stu for his injury, Stu?s best defense is:
A. That Stu could not reasonably foresee that the incline was of sufficient angle to
cause an un-braked car to roll.
B. That Tom was not a person within the risk of injury from Stu?s act.
C. That Stu could not reasonably foresee that a slowly rolling automobile would
cause serious injury.
D. That Stu had not created a risk of injury to any third person in front of the
automobile and therefore cannot be liable to Tom.
25. Abbott and Costello were in the habit of playing practical jokes on each other on
their respective birthdays. On Abbott?s birthday, Costello sent Abbott a cake
containing an ingredient that he knew had, in the past, made Abbott very ill.
After Abbott had eaten a piece of the cake, he suffered severe stomach pains and
had to be taken to the hospital by ambulance. On the way to the hospital, the
ambulance driver suffered a heart attack, which caused the ambulance to swerve
from the road and hit a tree. As a result of the collision, Abbott suffered a
broken leg.
In a suit by Abbott against Costello to recover damages for Abbott?s broken leg,
Abbott will:
A. Prevail, because Costello knew that the cake would be harmful or offensive to
Abbott.
B. Prevail, only if the ambulance driver was negligent.
C. Not prevail, because Costello could not reasonably be expected to foresee
injury to Abbott?s leg.
D. Not prevail, because the ambulance driver?s heart attack was a superseding
cause of Abbott?s broken leg. 
13
26. An ordinance of the city of Wilmington, DE prohibits parking on pedestrian
crosswalks. Justin parked his car on against the curb but on a crosswalk running
across Concord Pike in violation of the ordinance. A car driven negligently by
Hammond ran into Justin?s car while it was parked in the crosswalk, injuring
King, a passenger in Hammond?s car. King has asserted claims for his injuries
both against Hammond for negligent driving and against Justin for parking his
car in the crosswalk in violation of the crosswalk ordinance.
Will King prevail in his suit against Justin?
A. Yes, because parking in violation of the crosswalk ordinance was negligence
per se.
B. Yes, if King would not have been injured had Justin?s car not been parked in
the crosswalk.
C. No, because Justin?s parked car was not an active or efficient cause of King?s
injury.
D. No, if prevention of traffic accidents was not a purpose of the ordinance.
27. Ernie let his roommate borrow his car for the specific purpose of picking up
some cheesesteaks that the roommates ordered for dinner. The roommate drove
to the mall where the cheesesteak store was located and parked there. Instead of
going directly to the cheesesteak store, the roommate went into a record store,
browsed, and purchased a CD. The roommate then went to the cheesesteak store
and picked up the order which had been ready for 15 minutes. Just as the
roommate left the store to return to Ernie?s car, another car struck Ernie?s car,
causing extensive damage.
If Ernie sues roommate on a negligence theory, who will prevail?
A. Ernie, because roommate exceeded the scope of his authority when he went to
the record store.
B. Ernie, because but for the roommate?s delay in getting the cheesesteaks,
Ernie?s car would not have been damaged.
C. Roommate, because he did not create a foreseeable risk of damage to Ernie?s
car.
D. Roommate, because roommate did not have the requisite intent to cause
dispossession or damage to the chattel. 
14
28. A worker at a New Jersey oil refinery was severely burned when a pipe carrying
hot oil exploded. The worker brought a negligence action against the company
that manufactured the pipe. At trial, the worker established what happened and
the injuries he suffered. He also presented evidence that the pipe burst because it
had corroded at a higher than normal rate, which according to testimony of the
worker?s experts indicated a defect in the manufacture of the pipe. At the close
of the worker?s case, the manufacturer moved for a directed verdict.
The court should:
A. Deny the motion, because the jury could find that the premature corrosion of
the pipe would not have occurred absent negligence by the manufacturer.
B. Grant the motion, because the worker has not established that the manufacturer
was negligent.
C. Grant the motion, because the pipe was not in the manufacturer?s possession
when it exploded.
29. Farmer Brown hired Allied Movers to move his collection of antique Amish
farming tools to a new farmhouse. The movers, wanting to move everything in a
single trip, loaded the open bed truck too high. Several iron rakes and shovels
crashed to the ground. However, they were not even scratched or dented.
If Brown brings a negligence action against the movers, he can recover:

A. Nominal damages
B. Punitive damages
C. Both nominal damages and punitive damages
D. Neither nominal damages nor punitive damages
30. Eileen was driving to her University of Maryland law school class in a car that
she knew did not have operating headlights. On the way to class, Eileen was
rear-ended by another driver who had been driving 25 mph over the posted
speed limit. Eileen suffered personal injuries and her car was damaged.
Maryland follows traditional contributory negligence rules and makes it a
misdemeanor to drive a vehicle that does not have operating headlights.
If Eileen brings an action against the driver, will she prevail?
A. Yes, because the misdemeanor statute is intended to protect against cars being
driven without headlights.
B. Yes, because the other driver?s violation of the speeding statute constituted
negligence per se.
 C. No, because Eileen violated the misdemeanor statute.
 D. No, because Eileen has not established that driving 25 mph over the speed
limit created an unreasonable risk of injury to others. 
15
31. A security guard negligently locked a door that Paul intended to use to exit the
building, so Paul was forced to use a different exit. As Paul stepped outside onto
the sidewalk, a car careened out of control and jumped the curb up onto the
sidewalk. The car struck and injured Paul. Paul has sued the security guard for
his injuries. At trial, the parties stipulated that the guard was negligent in
locking the door. Paul also established that if he had exited from the locked door
(as he intended to), he would not have been injured. At the end of Paul?s case,
the security guard moved for a directed verdict. The court should:
A. Grant the motion, because the driver of the car was the actual cause of Paul?s
injuries.
B. Grant the motion, because the car was an unforeseeable intervening force.
C. Deny the motion, because the jury could find that but for the guard?s
negligence, Paul would not have been injured.
D. Deny the motion, because the jury could find that the guard?s negligence was a
foreseeable cause of Paul?s injury.
32. Jimmy worked in Pennsylvania but lived in Maryland. One night, Jimmy missed
his ride home, so he walked across the street to HOOTERS to get a drink. He
chatted with another customer and discovered that they lived only a few blocks
from each other. Customer offered to give Jimmy a ride home. Although he
knew that customer was probably too drunk to drive, Jimmy reluctantly agreed.
On the way home (while in Maryland), Customer, driving in a dangerous
manner, was involved in a collision with another car whose driver was also
driving negligently. Jimmy was injured. Maryland retains traditional rules of
contributory negligence.
 In an action by Jimmy against Customer, Jimmy should:
A. Prevail, because Customer drove in a dangerous manner
B. Prevail, because Customer?s negligence was a proximate cause of Jimmy?s
injuries.
C. Not prevail, because the other driver involved in the collision was negligent.
D. Not prevail, because Jimmy knew Customer was drunk.
33. Hussein brought in his car for scheduled maintenance. The mechanic certified
that the car was in perfect working order. Later that day, Hussein was driving
over the speed limit when his brakes failed, causing his car to strike a pedestrian.
If the pedestrian brings an action against the mechanic, what will be the probable
outcome?
A. Judgment for mechanic, because Hussein?s negligence was an independent,
superseding cause
B. Judgment for mechanic, because the pedestrian was a bystander
C. Judgment for pedestrian, if the mechanic was negligent in inspecting the car 
16
34. Keanu was jogging along the Brandywine biking/jogging trail. Suddenly, a
driver pulled out of an alley perpendicular to the trail and failed to stop at a stop
sign. The driver hit Keanu with her car, injuring him. Keanu sued the driver. A
Wilmington, DE ordinance provides that drivers must stop at all stop signs
perpendicular to the biking/jogging trail.
On the basis of which standard of care will the driver probably be judged?
A. That of a reasonable and prudent person under the facts of the situation
B. The standard set by the city ordinance
C. The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, because it can be presumed that nobody
would fail to stop at a stop sign in the absence of negligence
D. The standard established by qualified expert witnesses
35. PNC Bank notified the police that an audit had revealed one of its tellers had
been embezzling money. After a bank officer signed a complaint on behalf of the
bank, the police obtained a warrant from a magistrate and arrested the teller
named in the complaint. The teller protested, asserting that she had stolen
nothing. After the teller had been in jail overnight, the bank discovered that the
auditor had named the wrong teller and immediately notified the police. The
arrested teller was released with apologies. The teller then sued the city and the
police department for false imprisonment. Will the teller prevail?
 A. Yes, because of the teller?s protests of innocence
 B. Yes, because the teller had not actually embezzeled from the bank
 C. No, because the police acted pursuant to a valid warrant
 D. No, because the police released the teller as soon as they discovered the error
36. Sarah was driving carefully but with a just-expired vehicle emissions
registration, in violation of a state statute. When Sarah stopped at a stop sign,
another driver, who was speeding, crashed into her car. Sarah suffered injuries
and sued the other driver.
The fact that Sarah had an expired registration would not affect her claim
because:
A. The defendant?s negligence occurred after Sarah?s.
B. The defendant should have known that there are some unregistered vehicles,
like Sarah?s, on the road.
C. The prevention of accidents of this sort is not the reason that drivers are
required to renew their registration.
D. There is a greater chance of causing injury when a driver speeds than when a
person drives with an expired registration. 
17
37. Len was a law student who, in October 2010, bought a new $1200 laptop to
prepare his outlines. One day, without permission and even though Len really
needed the laptop to study for exams, Len?s roommate loaned Len?s laptop to her
mother. Unfortunately, the mother caused extensive damage to the laptop. The
cost to repair was $500, including the cost of shipping and handling (7-12
business days to/from Dell, Inc.).
In an action by Len against his roommate:
A. Len will recover $1200.
B. Len will recover the fair market value of the laptop.
C. Len will recover $500.
D. Len will recover nothing, because roommate did not damage the machine and
the mother?s conduct was not intentional.
38. Tom and Nicole, once married to each other, had gone through a bitter divorce.
The divorce awarded custody of the couple?s five-year-old son to Nicole, with
visitation for Tom. On one weekend visit, Tom disappeared with the boy. Nicole
was greatly distressed and called Tom?s parents weekly, asking if they knew
where their son and grandson were. The parents knew exactly where they were
and even sent their son money to support him while he was on the run. But
Tom?s parents always told Nicole that they knew nothing. Three years later, the
police arrested Tom and returned the boy to Nicole.
If Nicole sues the parents for intentional infliction of emotional distress, will she
prevail?
A. Yes, because the parents acted in deliberate disrespect of a high probability
that their actions would cause Nicole to suffer emotional distress.
B. Yes, because the parents enabled their son to stay on the run by supporting
him.
C. No, because Nicole has not suffered physical harm.
D. No, because Nicole was never in a zone of danger. 
18
39. A state statute requires that any cab driver who carries passengers for hire must
have a commercial driver?s license. D was an experienced driver who had a
regular license but not a commercial license. P knew that D did not have a
commercial license but, not wanting to be late, asked D to drive him to the Eagles
game. D, having failed to fill-up before picking up passengers, stopped on the
way to buy gas. But while in the gas station parking lot, D?s car was struck by a
car that some teenagers were illegally drag racing against a motorcycle.
If P sues D, who will prevail?
A. D, because P knew he lacked a commercial license and voluntarily assumed
the risk of driving with him.
 B. D, because injuries to P were caused by the negligence of the other driver.
 C. P, because D violated a statute designed to protect persons without commercial
licenses from driving passengers for a fee, and such violation imposes liability
per se.
D. P, because D stopped for gas and but for this mistake P would not have been
injured by the other car.
40. Last month, Ingrid had a swimming pool and a cabana constructed in her
spacious backyard. The pool was totally within the confines of Ingrid?s property.
But the cabana extended a few inches onto the neighbor?s property. At the time
of construction, nobody knew that the cabana extended onto the neighbor?s
property: not Ingrid, not the neighbor, not the construction company.
Does the neighbor have a cause of action for trespass?
A. Yes, because the cabana extends onto the neighbor?s property.
B. Yes, because the presence of the cabana on the neighbor?s land has caused
damage to his property.
C. No, because Ingrid did not actually enter the neighbor?s property.
D. No, because the landowner did not intend to have the cabana encroach on the
neighbor?s property.
